I want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits have rolled this time we're
going to be tackling one of the most
talked-about endings in movie history
that of Stanley Kubrick's seminal
science fiction masterpiece 2001 a Space
Odyssey now this film based on noted
sci-fi author arthur c clarke short
story The Sentinel was released in 1968
and wild audiences around the world many
people got it many people didn't and
it's been the subject for debate for
almost 50 years at this point the
two-and-a-half-hour
epic is full to the brim with symbolic
imagery and could be dissected
indefinitely so we're really just going
to focus on the ending of the film
though that is no simple matter either
way the film is split into four distinct
sections though many have argued that in
line with the on-screen titles it's only
three sections we begin with the dawn of
man where apes discover a mysterious
black monolith which appears to
influence them to realize they can use
violence against each other in one of
the great jump cuts in cinema history we
transition from a bone flying through
the air to space and follow a group of
humans who travel to the moon to
investigate a recently discovered
artifact which turns out to be another
black monolith the second section is the
Jupiter mission some 18 months later
where we follow a crew setting out to
find out why the monolith on the moon
sent out a transmission to this planet
after a lot of drama and goings-on on
the ship and as great of a character as
Hal is we can't really talk about his
character that much because he doesn't
factor into the ending dr. David Bowman
is the last man left on the ship and he
goes out into space in an Eevee a pod to
investigate another monolith floating in
orbit around Jupiter there he is pulled
deep into a vortex of light what follows
is a near ten-minute sequence in which
Bowman's travels through the portal
is shown in dizzying detail with
kaleidoscopic lights bizarre
interstellar imagery and unusual
landscapes characterized by abstract
colors eventually his pod comes to rest
inside a predominantly white room
decorated in a neoclassical style David
begins to explore the room and wanders
into the bathroom when he looks at
himself in the mirror he realizes that
he is aged significantly by the lines on
his face as he looked back into the room
an old man has sat inside in an eerie
transition the old man gets up and walks
towards the bathroom and we realized
that he is in fact an even older version
of David who has now taken over the old
David returns to eating his dinner
inside the white room and accidentally
knocks his glass onto the floor as he
leans down he hears breathing and
notices an ancient man lying in the bed
again we transition to an incredibly old
David who slowly reaches his hand up and
the big reveal another black monolith
inside the room as David reaches out to
it he transforms into a fetus enclosed
inside a glowing orb of bright light the
camera zooms in on the monolith until it
encloses the entire screen and we smash
cut to the moon and a classical piece of
music begins to play forever linked to
2001 entitled also sprach zarathustra
and slowly but surely we see the reveal
of the so-called Starchild in orbit
above the earth as the film reaches its
climax
[Music]
so that was the ending but what does it
all mean well it would be foolish to
think that this is a simple matter of
decoding and finding out the true
meaning as this is a movie ending that
truly does rest upon the viewers
interpretation in a lot of ways the key
is obviously the monolith an object that
is both puzzled and delighted viewers
over the years the simplistic yet harsh
and cold design draws the eye and
intrigues the mind
it appears during the evolution of
mankind and its appearance on the moon
and later Jupiter could be the hint that
a new stage in human evolution is about
to begin
was David literally turned back into a
baby and transported back to earth I
don't think it's quite as simple as that
nor do I think he's even necessarily
been reverted back to his youngest form
it could quite possibly be a new
organism and that David was merely the
vessel for a new life-form one theory
points towards David being shown the Big
Bang in the vortex sequence the very
beginning of the universe itself before
he is transformed into the next state of
being another is that the whole ending
is an allegory for conception birth life
and death and bear with me on this one
the spaceship for the Jupiter mission is
bulb headed almost sperm like and
Jupiter itself or even the floating
monolith above it could be seen as the
egg as David is taken through the vortex
or the stargates was seeing the visual
depiction of conception and as David
watches himself wither away and die he
is reborn a star child conceived on a
higher plane yeah I'm not too sure about
that one myself but it is fun to
speculate now the biggest real clue as
to what is really going on can be found
in the novel by arthur c clarke while
the film was inspired by his short story
The Sentinel he developed and worked on
the script for 2001 with Stanley Kubrick
and also wrote a novel based on this
collaboration published shortly after
the film was released in the novel
things are explained a little more
clearly the monolith is depicted as a
gateway allowing travel to other parts
of the galaxy the book calls the portal
of David travels through
GrandCentral an enabler of interstellar
travel the book further explains that
the monolith is a tool created by an
alien species and they traveled the
universe assisting lesser species to
take the next evolutionary step the room
is deduced by David to be some kind of a
zoo created by these aliens where he is
being studied the clinical yet familiar
design of the room thought to be
fabricated from information the aliens
received from television transmissions
thus David's transformation into the
Starchild as far as arthur c clarke is
concerned is quite literal and he was
sent back to earth to no doubt begin the
next phase in human evolution whatever
that might be
or entail however clark did note that
his novel contains his interpretation
which is not necessarily Kubrick's nor
is it even the right one
it seems that Kubrick prefers to leave
the viewer to decide what it means for
themselves and what they personally get
out of such a richly constructed piece
of pure cinema many have interpreted the
film as the search for God likening
David reaching out for the monolith on
the bed to Adam pointing to God in the
creation of Adam painting so 2001 a
Space Odyssey is hardly a film that can
ever truly have its ending or absolute
meaning explained but more explored to
me the literal explanation is almost
irrelevant and the feeling that those
final 30 minutes evoke overpower all
logical points it's truly an experience
here's a few things that Stanley Kubrick
and arthur c clarke had to say about the
conclusion of the movie in 1968 the year
of the movie's release Kubrick said this
you're free to speculate as you wish
about the philosophical and allegorical
meaning of the film and such speculation
is one indication that it has succeeded
in gripping the audience at a deep level
but I don't want to spell out a verbal
roadmap for 2001 that every view will
feel obligated to pursue or else fear
he's missed the point
arthur c clarke was a little more blunt
when he said this if anyone understands
it on the first viewing we failed in our
intention
Kubrick fired back against this common
arguing that the very nature of the
visual experience in 2001 is to give the
viewer an instantaneous visceral
reaction that does not and should not
require further amp
occasion Clarke later clarified his
comments saying what I meant was that
because we were dealing with the mystery
of the universe and with powers and
forces greater than man's comprehension
then by definition they could not be
totally understandable
yet there is at least one logical
structure and sometimes more than one
behind everything that happens on the
screen in 2001 and the ending does not
consist of random enigmas some critics
to the contrary so there you have it
what are your thoughts on the ending of
2001 I always ask for your
interpretation but perhaps now more than
ever I'm intrigued to hear what people's
thoughts are to reiterate I see the
ending and in fact the whole film as an
experience that penetrates the
subconscious and taps into something
deeper that can't be simply quantified
with words so I kind of take from both
schools of thinking but don't think it's
unreasonable for anyone to take
something completely different from the
film and its finale should it strike
them in a meaningful way or maybe I'm
just talking out my ass that's all up to
you as is the way you interpret 2001 a
Space Odyssey
I've been Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm
thank you for watching movie endings
explain and we'll see you with the next
one
[Music]